=================================
Title: Gold soars past Rs300,000 per tola
Tag: Money
URL: https://kathmandupost.com/money/2026/01/24/gold-soars-past-rs300-000-per-tola
Scraped at: 2026-01-24T10:58:41.089486

Gold prices continued their relentless climb, crossing Rs300,000 per tola in the domestic bullion market for the first time, buoyed by global tensions and mounting economic uncertainty.
On Friday, the last trading day of the week, gold jumped by Rs9,200 per tola to Rs301,400 per tola, according to the Federation of Gold and Silver Dealers’ Association. Over the past year, the price of the precious metal has surged by Rs141,400 a tola.
In the international market, spot gold traded at $4,957.1 per ounce on Friday after scaling a record high of $4,966.59 earlier in the day.
International bullion analysts say the rally is being driven by persistent economic and geopolitical risks. “As we do not expect these risks to fade in the near term, we believe gold still has further upside potential,” Adarsh Diwe, a Mumbai-based consultant at Metals Focus who tracks South Asian bullion markets, told the Post.
He said the lingering uncertainty around US policy, sustained geopolitical tensions, and growing concerns over sovereign debt in major industrialised economies are reinforcing gold’s role as a diversification asset.
Gold is widely viewed as a hedge against currency market volatility. Traditionally, it moves in the opposite direction of the US dollar, as weakness in the dollar makes dollar-priced gold cheaper for holders of other currencies, and vice-versa. Recent trade tariffs imposed by US President Donald Trump have triggered a global trade war, rattling currency markets worldwide.
The policy stance of global central banks has also played a key role in shaping gold’s trajectory. Lower interest rates reduce the opportunity cost of holding gold, which does not yield interest, making it more attractive to investors.
Large buyers and institutional investors typically source gold from major banks, while prices in the spot market are determined by real-time supply and demand. Spot gold refers to the current market price at which the metal can be bought or sold for immediate delivery.
“Based on the current trend, the price of gold and silver is expected to continue rising. At this point, we have no idea where the bullion price will break and how much further it will go,” said Arjun Rasaili, president of the federation.
He added that unless the US changes its foreign policy stance, gold prices are likely to stay on an upward trajectory. Domestic bullion traders say gold could soon reach Rs325,000 per tola.
Despite record-breaking prices, demand remains strong. Traders say consumers continue to buy gold in anticipation of further gains. The ongoing wedding season has also provided a modest boost to demand, Rasaili said.
At the same time, the trend of people selling their old gold jewellery has declined, increasing the need for imported gold. “There would be no demand for imported gold if buyers sold their gold,” Rasaili said.
Reflecting rising demand, gold imports jumped by 137.52 percent in the second quarter of the current fiscal year compared to the same period last year. According to the Department of Customs, Nepal imported 1,104 kilograms of gold worth Rs19.67 billion in the first six months of the current fiscal year until mid-January, up from 726 kilograms in the same period last year.
In response, Nepal Rastra Bank, the central bank, increased the daily gold import quota to 25 kg, from 20 kg in October.
“Demand has also been fuelled by people investing in gold as prices break records almost daily,” Rasaili said, adding that the domestic bullion market currently sells 15 to 20 kg of gold each day. Traders say many people are withdrawing savings to invest in gold and silver.
Much of the demand is for coins and pure wire rings, locally known asberuwa aunthi, which are favoured for their assured resale value.

=================================
Title: Adult inmates to be separated from juvenile homes
Tag: National
URL: https://kathmandupost.com/national/2026/01/24/adult-inmates-to-be-separated-from-juvenile-homes
Scraped at: 2026-01-24T10:58:41.483958

The ever-increasing cases of violence in juvenile correction homes have prompted the government to separate minor delinquents from adults and relocate the latter to the Nuwakot-based open prison.
Over the years, infighting in such correction centres has become increasingly frequent, leading to several deaths and injuries. At least six clashes have been reported from the country’s east to the west, the latest being in Bhaktapur.
Eight inmates and one police person were injured after clashes broke out between two groups at the Sanothimi-based correction centre on Thursday night. One of the blocks of the centre was torched by juvenile delinquents. It took hours for the district police to bring the situation under control.
“The inmates have been housed at various police stations as one of the blocks, which accommodated male inmates, was set on fire,” Suresh Acharya, assistant chief district officer in Bhaktapur, told the Post. As many as 169 inmates, including 24 females, were housed in the centre.
This is the second time in a year that clashes have taken place at the Bhaktapur centre.
A juvenile delinquent is a person under the age of 18 who commits an act that would otherwise be charged as a crime if s/he was an adult. Under existing law, minors who commit crimes punishable by law are kept in correction homes instead of being sent to jail after a court verdict.
Those who cross 18 years of age before completing their terms too are kept in correction homes with minors until they serve the given sentence.
Officials say the inmates who are above 18 years of age are often the troublemakers. Unlike other prisons, which fall under the home ministry, the correction centres come under the Ministry of Women, Children and Social Welfare. As a result, police are not allowed in such centres. “Containing clashes is challenging in the absence of police,” said Acharya.
Government bodies and civil society organisations have long recommended separating adults and minors as the only viable solution. In a move towards implementing the recommendation, the Cabinet on December 21 decided to relocate the adult inmates from correction centres to Nuwakot.
“We plan to shift 200 of them from different centres to Nuwakot,” Durga Praasad Chalise, chief of the child protection unit at the Ministry of Women and Children, told the Post. “It will be done after the necessary budget is arranged.”
Home Minister Om Prakash Aryal and Minister for Women, Children and Social Welfare Shradha Shrestha held a meeting following the Bhaktapur incident and decided to relocate the adult delinquents as soon as possible.
The country has eight juvenile correction centres—in Bhaktapur, Morang, Kaski, Makawanpur, Parsa, Rupandehi, Banke and Doti. The centres are tasked with bringing about changes in the attitudes and behaviour of the children who have committed crimes, and these places are required to meet specific standards.
However, various reports suggest that correction centres in the country have failed to serve their purpose.
A 2024 study by the Law, Justice and Human Rights Committee of the House of Representatives found that juvenile correction centres are overcrowded, lack basic amenities, and have safety issues. The report found that they lack adequate facilities for education, healthcare, hygiene, rest, sports and psychological counselling. Many centres are housing inmates more than four times their capacity.
Against a capacity of 50 inmates, the juvenile correction centre in Biratnagar houses 222. Similarly, 117 inmates have been crammed into the Birgunj-based correction centre, which has a capacity of just 17. In Banke, 240 inmates are housed in a centre designed for 190.
Likewise, after monitoring all correction centres last year, the National Human Rights Commission concluded all of them suffer from serious managerial problems.

=================================
Title: Nepali Congress names Gagan Thapa its PM candidate
Tag: Politics
URL: https://kathmandupost.com/politics/2026/01/24/nepali-congress-names-gagan-thapa-its-pm-candidate
Scraped at: 2026-01-24T10:58:41.881218

The Nepali Congress on Friday declared party president Gagan Thapa as its prime ministerial candidate if the party wins a majority in the March parliamentary elections.
A meeting of the newly elected central working committee held at the party headquarters in Sanepa decided to go to the polls by projecting Thapa as the party’s candidate for prime minister, said Devaraj Chalise, the Congress spokesperson.
It was the first central committee meeting since Thapa waselectedCongress chief by a special general convention on January 15.
Party vice-president Bishwa Prakash Sharma said the move was intended to give voters a clear choice on who the party wants to lead the government. Sharma had tabled the proposal at the meeting.
The Congress move comes after the CPN-UML and the Rastriya Swatantra Party (RSP) announced their own prime ministerial candidates. The UML has already named its chair KP Sharma Oli, while the RSP has declared the immediate past mayor of Kathmandu, Balendra Shah, as its choice ahead of the elections. Other leaders are also aspiring to become prime minister.
According to Sharma, on the basis of five criteria—individual background, values, contribution, competence, and vision—the party declared Thapa as its prime ministerial candidate. He said, “Among the names currently being discussed as prime ministerial candidates, the candidate put forward by the Congress stands out.”
Thapa is contesting the snap parliamentary election from Sarlahi-4.
A rival faction led by the party’s immediate past president, Sher Bahadur Deuba, had deployed youths loyal to him and opposed to the new leadership to block the new Congress leadership from entering the party headquarters for several days. They left the premises only on Thursday, allowing Thapa and the new leadership to take charge.
Eight days after being elected president, Thapa reached the Congress central office in Sanepa and assumed the role for the first time. A central committee meeting followed. Thapa told journalists that the Congress had transformed itself before entering the election race. He instructed party leaders and cadres to focus on election preparations.
He also said that the method of selecting candidates would be corrected and made more inclusive next time. “From next time onwards, Congress candidates will not be selected this way. Friends at the district level will decide by voting. Due to time constraints, we could not complete the work [this time],” Thapa said.
“Even though we wanted to do things differently, we couldn’t this time. If we had more time, we could have made it [selection process] more inclusive.”
Acknowledging weaknesses in the candidate selection process, he added, “There have been some mistakes and shortcomings. As chairperson, I ask everyone to understand the errors and difficulties.”
Thapa said some issues arose due to the pressure of starting candidate selection on January 16 and submitting nominations by January 19, and that he would take responsibility for them.
“We could not select candidates in accordance with the document presented at the special general convention. From next time, candidates will be selected through voting from the grassroots level,” Thapa said. “Because we had to begin selecting candidates on January 16 and register them by January 19, even if we wanted to, we could not ensure inclusiveness and balance in the nomination process.”
He said that shortcomings occurred because they had to proceed without consulting party aspirants. He expressed his commitment to correcting these issues both personally and institutionally. “We can still discuss the shortcomings, but now there is no alternative but to move forward unitedly into the election,” he said.
A strong faction of the party led by Deuba had boycotted the special general convention that elected Thapa as party president. Thapa was elected through the convention, and different opinions remain within the party.
Thapa said it was the party members themselves who changed the Congress. “This Congress did not change on its own—we changed it. We transformed the Congress,” he said. “Now it will also transform the country. With this resolve, the Congress has entered the election.”
He called on the party’s one million active members across the 165 constituencies, saying, “There are differing opinions even within the party. Issues related to the general convention can be discussed later.” Thapa was elected through the recently concluded special convention and there are counter views and arguments inside the party.
Friday’s central working committee meeting also decided to form a central publicity and outreach committee under the coordination of party spokesperson Chalise, and a central office building reconstruction committee under former treasurer Umesh Shrestha for the reconstruction of the Nepali Congress Central Office building. The office was among numerous public and private properties torched by protesters on the second day of the anti-corruption Gen Z revolt on September 9.

=================================
Title: Tatopani border still shut even after wildfire tamed
Tag: Bagmati Province
URL: https://kathmandupost.com/province-no-3/2026/01/23/tatopani-border-remains-shut-despite-wildfire-brought-under-control
Scraped at: 2026-01-24T10:58:42.515978

The wildfire that broke out in the forest areas along the Nepal-China border in the Nyalam-Khasa area has been brought under control, but the Tatopani border point has yet to resume full operations.
The Chinese side has informed Nepali authorities that the crossing cannot be reopened as the customs system on its side is still inoperational due to damage caused by the fire.
According to Sindhupalchok Chief District Officer Ram Krishna Adhikari, Chinese authorities have been updating Nepal that border operations became impossible after fires erupted in Nyalam, Khasa and Chhobin areas. The fire reportedly started after an electricity transformer exploded in Khasa, spreading rapidly through dense forest. Residents of Khasa and the nearby Ramite were relocated to safer locations.
Although the fire that started on January 11 was brought under control on January 17, the border remains closed to the general public. “The border opened partially for a day on Wednesday and then closed again. It has not reopened since,” said Inspector Jag Bahadur Rai of the Kodari Area Police Office. “A few empty containers are going to China, and three to four containers of goods are entering Nepal, but this is not regular.”
Around 400 container trucks have been stranded on roads in the border area due to the closure, creating further problems for importers and traders.
Inspector Rai said the border area has been deserted since the closure. Authorities say there is no certainty of regular movement until the Chinese customs system is fully restored.
Buddha Raj Basnet, president of the Federation of Nepalese Chambers of Commerce & Industry’s Sindhupalchok chapter, said traders have become increasingly frustrated as containers carrying goods worth millions of rupees remain stuck. “Nearly 400 containers are stranded on roads in Khasa, Nyalam and the surrounding border areas,” he said.
The 26-kilometre Bahrabise-Tatopani road becomes dusty in summer and muddy during the monsoon, making container movement riskier. Infrastructure damaged by floods on the Chinese side, including quarantine facilities, parking areas, access roads to Khasa and tunnels, is still under reconstruction.
Meanwhile, traders say China's allowing only seven to 12 containers per day further complicates the situation.
The closure has worsened trade disruption with China. With the Rasuwagadhi border point remaining shut since the July flood, most trade had been routed through Tatopani. Due to the latest shutdown, containers carrying goods worth millions of rupees have been stranded on both sides of the border, leaving traders and importers concerned.

=================================
Title: Laligurans, the underdogs, continue unbeaten run at the National League
Tag: Sports
URL: https://kathmandupost.com/sports/2026/01/24/laligurans-the-underdogs-continue-unbeaten-run-at-the-national-league
Scraped at: 2026-01-24T10:58:42.996238

The National League should have had 10 teams—four clubs that qualified from the ANFA President League and six of the top teams from the previous Martyr’s Memorial ‘A’ Division League. But there are 13 of the A-Division clubs in the ongoing National League, as the governing body of Nepali football could not handle the pressure from the clubs that refused to remain dormant due to the long absence of a top-tier league.
Even if there were only 10 clubs, the four teams from the President League would not be the favourites to win the National League, let alone a tournament involving 17 clubs.
Laligurans Association Club, the club representing Pokhara of Kaski district, qualified for the National League as the champions of the President League. Reaching the President League as the champions of Kaski and Gandaki, Laligurans have, of late, been the talk of the National League based on their performance and results.
Three in three wins for Laligurans
Opening the tournament with a 1-0 win over Jawalakhel Youth Club, Laligurans defeated their President League companion Nawa Jana Jagriti Yuwa Club 4-1 in the second match.
And on Friday, Laligurans defeated a five-time A-Division League champion, Nepal Police FC, with a last-minute goal to extend their winning streak to three.
In the last of the three matches of the day, Laligurans and Nepal Police were goalless until the 90 minutes of regulation time ended at Dasharath Stadium. But in the five minutes of added time, Laligurans found the back of the net.
Only around a minute was left for the referee to blow the whistle when Sudip Gurung, who was subbed in during the 84th minute, ran with the ball from the middle. He was obstructed by two Nepal Police players, but, with a bit of luck, he kept the ball and chipped it over the defenders to find Ashish Gurung inside the box. And Ashish, Laligurans’ No 10, did not miss.
It was Ashish’s second goal in the league. His first came in the 4-1 win over Nawa Jana Jagriti.
Despite being No 10, Ashish has not started in any of the three matches. Against Police, he was subbed in during the 68th minute.
“We have a strong bench,” Laligurans’ head coach Kiran Shrestha said during the post-match conference, explaining why he did not start with the No 10. “The players believe in the system and each other. This makes us a good team and this is why Ashish did not start off.”
Shrestha used all five substitutions to get fresh legs in the areas he saw fit. And it bore fruit.
“We are the underdogs,” Shrestha said, asked if his team could aim for the league title amidst the heavyweights of Nepali football. “We are taking one game at a time. The players have been told not to get too high with the wins. We will give our best in every game.”
Laligurans’ next opponents are Tribhuvan Army Club (January 27) and Machhindra FC (February 2).
But after defeating a departmental side on Monday, Shrestha believes it will motivate his players for the next game.
“Nepal Police are a good team with a good coach. And this win was the most special one among the last three,” he said. “Army, our next opponent, are great physically and also have a good coach. But this win will keep us extra motivated as we look for three more points.”
With three wins, Laligurans have their position at the top of the table secure.
Meanwhile, Nepal Police’s head coach Chetan Ghimire backed his players despite their second loss in three matches. Police lost their first match in the league 0-1 against Planning Boyz United and drew the second 1-1 with Chitlang FC, another club from the President League.
“I am happy with their performance though we conceded late and lost three points,” said Ghimire, a former Nepal Police striker. “I have formed a team of many young talents. It will take time for them to get used to playing at a top level.”
Ghimire also stated that his players were getting better with every game, and said, “There are good days ahead.”
Wins for Bhagawati and Satdobato
There was another match on Friday where one goal was enough to decide the winner. Satdobato Youth Club’s Fode Fofana scored the only goal of the match against Manang Marsyangdi Club in the first match played at Dasharath Stadium.
Fofana scored in the 61st minute. It was his second goal of the league. His first came in Satdobato’s 3-1 win over New Road Team.
Satdobato now have seven points in three matches, as they had played a goalless draw with Sankata FC in their first match of the league.
Nonetheless, there were goals raining in the first match of the day at the ANFA Complex. Shree Bhagawati Club, one of the two newly promoted clubs to the A Division, defeated Nawa Jana Jagriti 5-1.
Martins Kayode Ajayi scored the first goal of the match within two minutes of the first whistle. Shishir Lekhi then made it 2-0 by scoring the first goal of the league from the penalty spot in the 38th. Before the first half ended, youngster Subash Bam Thakuri made it 3-0 in the 42nd.
In the second half, a span of four minutes saw Bhagawati’s lead extended to 5-0. Semanta Thapa scored in the 54th minute, while Lekhi scored his second individual goal in the 58th. The only consolation goal for Nawa Jana Jagriti came in the 77th minute through Bikram Thokar.
There are two matches on Saturday, both at Dasharath Stadium. In the first fixture at 2pm, Machhindra FC will face Planning Boyz United, the B-Division champions. It will be followed by Chitlang FC playing Tribhuvan Army FC at 6:30pm.

